Add OSSM 2 vs 3 differences doc (#145)
openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator: docs/ossm/ossm2-vs-ossm3.md

# Compared to OpenShift Service Mesh 2

OpenShift Service Mesh 3 includes many important differences to be aware of coming from OpenShift Service Mesh 2.

OpenShift Service Mesh 3 is a major update with a feature set closer to the [Istio](https://istio.io/) project. It is based directly on Istio, rather than the midstream Maistra project that OpenShift Service Mesh 2 was based on. It is managed using a different, simplified operator and provides greater support for the latest stable features of Istio. This alignment with the Istio project along with lessons learned in the first two major releases of OpenShift Service Mesh have resulted in the following changes.

## From Maistra to Istio

> While OpenShift Service Mesh 1 and 2 releases were based on Istio, they included additional functionality that was maintained as part of the midstream Maistra project, which itself was based on the upstream Istio project. Maistra maintained several features that were not part of the upstream Istio project. While this provided extra features to OpenShift Service Mesh users, the effort to maintain the Maistra meant that OpenShift Service Mesh was usually several releases behind Istio with support omitted for major features like multi-cluster. Meanwhile, Istio has matured to cover most of the use cases addressed by Maistra. Basing OpenShift Service Mesh directly on Istio ensures that it will support users on the latest stable Istio features while Red Hat is able to contributing directly to the Istio community on behalf of its customers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While OpenShift Service Mesh 1 and 2 releases were based on Istio, they included additional functionality that was maintained as part of the midstream Maistra project, which itself was based on the upstream Istio project. Maistra maintained several features that were not part of the upstream Istio project. While this provided extra features to OpenShift Service Mesh users, the effort to maintain Maistra meant that OpenShift Service Mesh was usually several releases behind Istio with support omitted for major features like multi-cluster. Meanwhile, Istio has matured to cover most of the use cases addressed by Maistra. Basing OpenShift Service Mesh directly on Istio ensures that it will support users on the latest stable Istio features while Red Hat is able to contribute directly to the Istio community on behalf of its customers. 
```

## The OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 uses an operator that is maintained upstream as the sail-operator in the istio-ecosystem organization. This operator is smaller in scope and includes significant changes from the operator used in OpenShift Service Mesh 2 that was maintained as part of the Maistra.io project.

Author: Thanks - will do a search and replace.

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 uses an operator that is maintained upstream as the sail-operator in the istio-ecosystem organization. This operator is smaller in scope and includes significant changes from the operator used in OpenShift Service Mesh 2 that was maintained as part of the Maisra.io project.

Reviewer 2: probably a good idea to link to the repo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenShift Service Mesh 3 uses an operator that is maintained upstream as the sail-operator in the istio-ecosystem organization. This operator is smaller in scope and includes significant changes from the operator used in OpenShift Service Mesh 2 that was maintained as part of the Maistra.io project.
```

## Observability integrations rather than addons

A significant change in OpenShift Service Mesh 3 compared to OpenShift Service Mesh 2 is that the operator no longer installs and manages observability components such as Prometheus and Grafana with the service mesh control plane. It also no longer installs and manages distributed tracing components such as Tempo and OpenTelemetry (Jaeger and Elasticsearch in the past) or the Kiali dashboard. 

> The OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator limits its scope to Istio related resources, with observability components supported and managed by the independent operators that make up [Red Hat OpenShift Observability](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/#Observability) such as [logging](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/#/html/logging/index), user workload [monitoring](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/#/html/monitoring/index), [distributed tracing](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/#/html/distributed_tracing/index). The [Kiali dashboard](https://docs.openshift.com/service-mesh/3.0.0tp1/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.html) along with OpenShift Service Mesh Console will continue to be supported with the Kiali operator.

Reviewer: The URLs do not have OCP version. Is this intentional? 

The side-effect is that it does not land on the page you probably wanted it to land. 
i.e., for logging, the working URL is 
https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.17/html/logging/index
whereas if I click on the link from this doc, it takes me to 
https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.17#/html/logging/index

Author: It was an attempt to make the links version agnostic, but I don't think that feature works with Red Hat docs yet, so will have to hard code to OCP 4.17 for now. I will let docs determine the best link for publishing.

This simplification greatly reduces the footprint and complexity of OpenShift Service Mesh, while providing better, production-grade support for observability through Red Hat OpenShift Observability.

> ## `Istio` replaces `ServiceMeshControlPlane`

Author: Actually, I like your suggestion as it's more clear.

While OpenShift Service Mesh 2 used a resource called `ServiceMeshControlPlane` to configure Istio, OpenShift Service Mesh 3 uses a resource called `Istio`. 

> The `Istio` resource contains a `spec.values` field that derives its schema from Istio’s Helm chart values. While this is a different configuration schema than `ServiceMeshControlPlane` uses, the fact that it is derived from Istio’s configuration means that configuration examples from the community Istio documentation can often be applied directly to Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh’s `Istio` resource. The `spec.values` field has a similar format in `IstioOperator` resource (which is not part of OpenShift Service Mesh), with the `Istio` resource providing an additional validation schema enabling the ability to explore the resource using the OpenShift CLI command `oc explain istios.spec.values`.

Reviewer: Shall we use hyperlink for `Istio` and point it to the API docs?
i.e., https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/api-reference/sailoperator.io.md#istio

Author: Unfortunately, we're not allowed to have links to Github in the product docs :(.

> The `Istio` resource contains a `spec.values` field that derives its schema from Istio’s Helm chart values. While this is a different configuration schema than `ServiceMeshControlPlane` uses, the fact that it is derived from Istio’s configuration means that configuration examples from the community Istio documentation can often be applied directly to Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh’s `Istio` resource. The `spec.values` field has a similar format in `IstioOperator` resource (which is not part of OpenShift Service Mesh), with the `Istio` resource providing an additional validation schema enabling the ability to explore the resource using the OpenShift CLI command `oc explain istios.spec.values`.

Reviewer 2: I think here it would make more sense to refer to upstream helm charts (and their values API) rather than the IstioOperator API

Author: I did mention helm charts in the first sentence, but I also mentioned IstioOperator as well because it is widely used throughout the Istio.io documentation and has a full API reference in the Istio docs. The only reference I could find for Helm values was in the installation section: https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/helm/#installation-steps, and it seemed a lot more difficult to translate pages like this: https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/istio-official/istiod?modal=values, into config YAML if you're starting with the Istio. So, at face value, it looked like IstioOperator might be a more familiar starting point for upstream users... or people just reading the docs.

That said, I'm open to how best to convey this... and if the values field in IstioOperator is substantially different, then I should probably remove the reference.

> # New resource: `IstioCNI`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## New resource: `IstioCNI`
```

> ## New resource: `IstioCNI`

Author: @luksa @dgn Can you have another look at this section on the IstioCNI resource... Based on the discussion in the team call, we are still using Multus in 3.0 rather than CNI chaining, and it may not have been the reason for the IstioCNI resource.  Originally, I had said it had to do with the cluster vs namespace scoping, but changed it after feedback... was it just a simplification to decouple the lifecycles for canary upgrades?  Can you suggest a better explanation for "Why" we now have the IstioCNI resource? 

If the reasoning is messy, we can gloss over it a bit - the aim of this page is to tell users what they need to know coming from OSSM 2, not how everything works under the hood.

The Istio CNI node agent is used to configure traffic redirection for pods in the mesh. It runs as a DaemonSet, on every node, with elevated privileges. The Istio CNI agent has a lifecycle that is independent of Istio control planes, and must be upgraded separately. 

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 2, service meshes were namespace scoped by default and thus each mesh included its own instance of Istio CNI. As all OpenShift Service Mesh 3 meshes are cluster-wide, there can only be one version of Istio CNI per cluster, regardless of how many service mesh control planes are on the cluster.

Author: Thanks for clarifying this - I tried to reword with this. How's this?

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 2, the operator deployed an Istio CNI instance for each minor version of Istio present in the cluster and pods were automatically annotated during sidecar injection, such that they picked up the correct Istio CNI. This was enabled by using the Multus CNI plugin and meant that the management of Istio CNI was mostly hidden from users.
OpenShift Service Mesh 3 no longer uses the Multus CNI plugin, and instead runs Istio CNI as a chained CNI plugin. While this simplification provides greater flexibility for network integrations, without Multus, it means that only one instance of Istio CNI may be present in the cluster at any given time and users must manage its lifecycle independent of Istio control planes. 
For these reasons, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator manages Istio CNI with a separate resource called `IstioCNI`. A single instance of this resource is shared by all Istio control planes (managed by `Istio` resources). The `IstioCNI` resource must be upgraded before individual control planes (`Istio` resources) are upgraded.

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 2, service meshes were namespace scoped by default and thus each mesh included its own instance of Istio CNI. As all OpenShift Service Mesh 3 meshes are cluster-wide, there can only be one version of Istio CNI per cluster, regardless of how many service mesh control planes are on the cluster.

Reviewer 4: LGTM.

> For these reasons, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator manages Istio CNI with a separate resource called `IstioCNI`. A single instance of this resource is common to all Istio control planes (managed by `Istio` resources). The `IstioCNI` resource must be upgraded before individual control planes (`Istio` resources) are upgraded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For these reasons, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator manages Istio CNI with a separate resource called `IstioCNI`. A single instance of this resource is shared by all Istio control planes (managed by `Istio` resources). The `IstioCNI` resource must be upgraded before individual control planes (`Istio` resources) are upgraded.
```

> For these reasons, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator manages Istio CNI with a separate resource called `IstioCNI`. A single instance of this resource is common to all Istio control planes (managed by `Istio` resources). The `IstioCNI` resource must be upgraded before individual control planes (`Istio` resources) are upgraded.

Author: Same comment as above - there is a story to add a page with the API reference in the product docs though.

> For these reasons, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator manages Istio CNI with a separate resource called `IstioCNI`. A single instance of this resource is shared by all Istio control planes (managed by `Istio` resources). The `IstioCNI` resource must be upgraded before individual control planes (`Istio` resources) are upgraded.

Reviewer 4: It's not always strictly necessary to upgrade IstioCNI first, since Istio CNI doesn't change much. But it is advisable to upgrade it first.

Author: I found the istio.io docs unclear on version compatibility between Istio and Istio CNI, and this seemed like the safest recommendation. I could change it to "should", but then that begs the question - what if I don't? It just seemed like the simplest direction to give.

Reviewer 4: Yeah it's okay to say "must".

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 no longer uses the Multus CNI plugin, and instead runs Istio CNI as a chained CNI plugin. While this simplification provides greater flexibility for network integrations, without Multus, it means that only one instance of Istio CNI may be present in the cluster at any given time and users must manage its lifecycle independent of Istio control planes. 

Reviewer 2: we still use Multus, and the usage of Multus is also unrelated to us running only one instance (that part is true). The actual reason we only run one instance in 3.0 is because upstream did not accept our patch that would have allowed running multiple copies of CNI, with the reason given that it's not required as they have different lifecycles (which then turned into us creating a separate CRD for it)

## Scoping of the Mesh: Discovery Selectors and labels replace `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` and `ServiceMeshMember`

OpenShift Service Mesh 2 used the two resources `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` and `ServiceMeshMember` to indicate which namespaces were to be included in the mesh. When a mesh was created, it would only be scoped to the namespaces listed in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` or containing a `ServiceMeshMember` instance. This made it simple to include multiple service meshes in a cluster with each mesh tightly scoped, referred to as a “multitenant” configuration. 

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 2.4, a “cluster-wide” mode was introduced to allow a mesh to be cluster-scoped, with the option to limit the mesh using an Istio feature called `discoverySelectors`, which limits the scope of the mesh to a set of namespaces defined with a [label selector](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/). This is aligned with how community Istio worked, and allowed Istio to manage cluster-level resources.

Reviewer: nit: How about using the following URL for [label selector] 
https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#LabelSelector

Author: The kubernetes link describes much better what a label selector is, where as the Istio link just says "A label selector requirement is a selector that contains values, a key, and an operator that relates the key and values"... which I don't think helps much if you are new to Kubernetes label selectors. Are there aspects of a label selector that would not apply from the Kubernetes docs?

Reviewer: I could not find any difference. I see you POV, fine lets use k8s link itself.

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 2.4, a “cluster-wide” mode was introduced to allow a mesh to be cluster-scoped, with the option to limit the mesh using an Istio feature called `discoverySelectors`, which limits the scope of the mesh to a set of namespaces defined with a [label selector](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/). This is aligned with how community Istio worked, and allowed Istio to manage cluster-level resources.

Reviewer 4: > which limits the scope of the mesh ...

This is not perfectly exact. Yes, in 2.4 we could say that the SMMR/SMM limited the scope of the mesh, but in 3.x (and 2.x cluster-wide mode), there is no single concept of "scope". Instead, scope is split into discovery and injection. In 2.x multitenant mode the SMMR affected both at the same time. In 2.x cluster-wide and 3.x, you limit discovery via `discoverySelectors` and injection via namespace/workload labels.

Author: "scope of the mesh" is probably an over simplification, as you're right that injection matters too (the [injection doc PR](https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/pull/152) is relevant here too). I can change "limits the scope" to "limits the Istio control plane's visibility", which is more precise.

In 2.x though, at least as [we documented](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/service_mesh/v2x/prepare-to-deploy-applications-ossm.html#ossm-automatic-sidecar-injection_deploying-applications-ossm), you still needed to add an annotation or label to workloads for injection to happen. So, Discovery Selectors doesn't sound too different in practice (even though the Istiods are scoped differently)? Perhaps it was more different under the hood...

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 converges with Istio in making all meshes “cluster-wide”. This means that Istio control planes are all cluster-scoped resources and the resources `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` and `ServiceMeshMember` are no longer present, with meshes scoped to the entire cluster by default and then scoped down using `discoverySelectors`.

Reviewer 4: "and then scoped down" -> "and then discovery and injection scoped down using discovery selectors and namespace/workload labels, respectively".

To replace `ServiceMeshMemberRoll`, a `discoverySelector` may be configured to limit the scope of the mesh to one or more namespaces with labels that match the `discoverySelector`'s label selector. 

> To replace `ServiceMeshMember`, label(s) may be added to namespaces such that they trigger the label selector specified by `d`iscoverySelector`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To replace `ServiceMeshMember`, label(s) may be added to namespaces such that they trigger the label selector specified by `discoverySelector`.
```

> To replace `ServiceMeshMember`, label(s) may be added to namespaces such that they trigger the label selector specified by `discoverySelector`.

Reviewer 4: This makes it look as though SMMR and SMM did two different things. But the SMM is just a way to add a namespace to the SMMR. Then, the SMMR affects both discovery and injection.

So, instead of saying that users can replace the SMMR with discoverySelectors, and replace the SMM with labels, you should rewrite this to talk about discovery and injection.

Author: I thought the purposes of the SMM was to let a namespace/project join the mesh without having permissions to edit SMMR... in the same way, a user may not have permissions to edit the `Istio` resource, but may be able to edit namespaces labels to include a namespace in the mesh via an already defined discoverySelector? 

In practice... I suspect it's always the same admin though.

There is a separate section on sidecar injection below. I am trying to separate discovery from injection as concepts, though one take away is that I should reconsider the term "scope" for "discovery", with the thinking that "scope" = "discovery" + "injection".

Author: I decided to remove these two sentences, and to your suggestion, add one describing injection and directing them to that section. I also reordered so that injection is the next topic.

> ## Multiple Control Planes with Revisions

Reviewer 4: Calling out revisions here might confuse some people, since revisions are also used for upgrades within a single mesh.

Author: It's the same feature used differently, no? It's talked about a lot in the upstream doc: https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multiple-controlplanes/.

Author: After re-reading this, I agree and removed the term from the title.

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 supports multiple service meshes in the same cluster, but in a different manner than in OpenShift Service Mesh 2. A cluster administrator must create multiple `Istio` instances and then configure `discoverySelectors` appropriately to ensure that there is no overlap between mesh namespaces. 

Reviewer 2: note that we're actively working on removing the restriction regarding overlapping namespaces, but maybe that would go to far here

Author: Yup, I saw that with your upstream PR... we can't talk about future features in product doc though (even developer preview), so can't mention it here. Same with things like federation unfortunately. Those who are interested, can ask though :).

> As `Istio` resources are cluster-scoped, they must have unique names to represent unique meshes within the same cluster. The OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator uses this unique name to create a resource called `IstioRevision` with a name in the format of `{Istio name}` or `{Istio name}-{Istio version}`. Each instance of `IstioRevision` is responsible for managing a single control plane. It does this using Istio's revision labels of the format `istio.io/rev={IstioRevision name}` to identify pods that are part of their control plane. The name with the version identifier becomes important to support canary-style control plane upgrades (more on this in the upgrades section below).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As `Istio` resources are cluster-scoped, they must have unique names to represent unique meshes within the same cluster. The OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator uses this unique name to create a resource called `IstioRevision` with a name in the format of `{Istio name}` or `{Istio name}-{Istio version}`. Each instance of `IstioRevision` is responsible for managing a single control plane. Workloads are assigned to a specific control plane using Istio's revision labels of the format `istio.io/rev={IstioRevision name}`. The name with the version identifier becomes important to support canary-style control plane upgrades (more on this in the upgrades section below).
```

## Sidecar Injection: New Considerations

OpenShift Service Mesh 2 supported using pod annotations and labels to configure sidecar injection and there was no need to indicate which control plane a workload belonged to.

Sidecar injection in OpenShift Service Mesh 3 works the same way as it does for Istio - with pod or namespace labels used to trigger sidecar injection and it may be necessary to include a label that indicates which control plane the workload belongs to.  Note that Istio has deprecated pod annotations in favor of labels for sidecar injection.

> When an `Istio` resource has the name “default”, the label `istio-injection=enabled` may be used.

Author: Thanks, will update.

> When an `Istio` resource has the name “default”, the label `istio-injection=enabled` may be used.

Reviewer 5: This restriction will go away once we support the default tag but probably still worth calling out now.

Author: Thanks, do you think this page should be updated for the tag section? We can always update the page later...

Author: Probably best to leave it for now - though I'll leave this thread open.

Author: @dgn Would you be able to say how this section will change once the "tags" feature is implemented or do you think it's best to hold off until that is complete?

Reviewer 2: let's wait until it's actually merged. For the time being, the Istio resource being named `default` is only enough when you're also using InPlace strategy. with RevisionBased updates, at the moment you can't use that label at all

Author: Note that this also impacts the doc: https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/pull/147/files#r1806924107

Author: I created OSSM-8285 to update this text (and the injection doc) once the Tags issue (https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/pull/413) is delivered.

> However, when an Istio resource has a name other than “default” - as required when multiple control plane instances are present and/or a canary-style control plane upgrade is in progress, it is necessary to use a label that indicates which control plane (revision) the workload(s) belong to - namely, `istio.io/rev=<IstioRevision-name>`. These labels may be applied at the workload or namespace level.

Author: Ugh, yes, good catch - this wasn't right. It works if I change it to `IstioRevision` I think. I'll also clarify the previous paragraph, and mention that you can query revisions with `oc get istiorevision`

Related, when you have a moment, please review this PR: https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/pull/152 as it goes into this topic in more depth.

## Independently Managed Gateways

In Istio, gateways are used to manage traffic entering (ingress) and exiting (egress) the mesh. While by default, OpenShift Service Mesh 2 deployed and managed an Ingress Gateway and an Egress Gateway with the service mesh control plane, configured in the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource, the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator will no longer create or manage gateways. 

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 3, gateways are created and managed independent of the operator and control plane using gateway injection or Kubernetes Gateway API resources, both of which provide much greater flexibility than was possible with the ServiceMeshControlPlane. This allows the gateways to be customized for a set of applications, deployed and managed with the same lifecycle as their corresponding applications.

Reviewer 3: Should this be modified to reflect that we may not have supported CRDs for Gateway API when OSSM 3.0 GAs?

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 3, gateways are created and managed independent of the operator and control plane using gateway injection or Kubernetes Gateway API resources, both of which provide much greater flexibility than was possible with the ServiceMeshControlPlane. This allows the gateways to be customized for a set of applications, deployed and managed with the same lifecycle as their corresponding applications.

Author: ```suggestion
In OpenShift Service Mesh 3, gateways are created and managed independent of the operator and control plane using gateway injection. This provides much greater flexibility than was possible with the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource and ensures that gateways can be fully customized and managed as part of a GitOps pipeline. This allows the gateways deployed and managed alongside their applications with the same lifecycle.
```

> In OpenShift Service Mesh 3, gateways are created and managed independent of the operator and control plane using gateway injection. This provides much greater flexibility than was possible with the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource and ensures that gateways can be fully customized and managed as part of a GitOps pipeline. This allows the gateways deployed and managed alongside their applications with the same lifecycle.

Author: We don't support the CRDs for Gateway API on OCP yet (had to clarify that in 2.6), so it won't be a fully supported solution until OCP Ingress ships their support with the CRDs. I had it here before, and took it out... I think I will add it back, as we mostly support using it...but with caveats.

> This change was made because, as a good practice, gateways are better managed together with their corresponding worklods than with the service mesh control plane. This change also means starting with a gateway configuration that can expand over time to meet the more robust needs of a production environment, which was not possible with the default gateways in OpenShift Service Mesh 2. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change was made because, as a good practice, gateways are better managed together with their corresponding workloads than with the service mesh control plane. This change also means starting with a gateway configuration that can expand over time to meet the more robust needs of a production environment, which was not possible with the default gateways in OpenShift Service Mesh 2. 
```

## OpenShift Routes must be explicitely created

An OpenShift `Route` resource allows an application to be exposed with a public URL using OpenShift's Ingress operator for managing HAProxy based Ingress controllers. OpenShift Service Mesh 2 included a feature called Istio OpenShift Routing (IOR) that automatically created and managed OpenShift routes for Istio gateways. While this was convenient, as the operator would manage these routes for the user, it often caused confusion around ownership as many `Route` resources are managed by administrators. The feature also lacked the configurability of an independent `Route` resource, created unnecessary routes, and exhibited unpredictable behavior during upgrades.

Thus, in OpenShift Service Mesh 3, when a `Route` is desired to expose an Istio gateway, it must be created and managed by the user. Note that it is also possible to expose an Istio gateway through a Kubernetes service of type LoadBalancer if a route is not desired.

> ## Introducing Canary Upgrades

Reviewer 2: maybe somewhere in this section we should mention that users will now have to select a patch version (e.g. v1.21.3 instead of just v1.21) and patch updates are not applied automatically anymore. also, we now use upstream Istio versions in the spec.version field instead of OSSM version. customers can see the versions supported by the operator by running
```bash
oc explain istios.spec.version
```

Author: I am going to break this topic out into its own issue to add once the automatic upgrade issue is complete and we are sure which version of Istio will ship with GA OSSM 3. It's a little complicated to explain without examples and I want to make sure those are accurate for the GA release.

> OpenShift Service Mesh 2 supported only one approach for upgrades - an in-place style upgrade, where the control plane was upgraded, then  all gateways and workloads were restarted for the proxies could be upgraded. While this is a simple approach, it can create risk for large meshes where once the control plane was upgraded, all workloads must upgrade to the new control plane version without a simple way to roll back if something goes wrong.

Author: "needed to be" restarted? I am meaning that the proxies needed to be bounced as part of an upgrade - is that not correct?

## Multi-cluster Topologies

OpenShift Service Mesh 2 supported one form of multi-cluster: federation, which was introduced in version 2.1. In this topology, each cluster maintains its own independent control plane, with services only shared between those meshes on an as-needed basis. Communication between federated meshes is entirely through Istio gateways, meaning that there was no need for service mesh control planes to watch remote Kubernetes control planes, as is the case with Istio's multi-cluster service mesh topologies. Federation is ideal where service meshes are loosely coupled - managed by different administrative teams.

> OpenShift Service Mesh 3 includes support for Istio's multi-cluster topologies, namely: Multi-Primary, Primary-Remote and external control planes. These topologies effectively stretch a single unified service mesh across multiple clusters. This is ideal when all clusters involved are managed by the same administrative team. Istio's multi-cluster topologies are ideal for implementing high-availability or failover use cases across a commonly managed set of applications. 

Author: Agreed... unfortunately, as this is for the product doc, we can't mention features that aren't at least tech preview (and those would have a big disclaimer). We will look to tell people about federation in the release blog posts.

## Istioctl

> OpenShift Service Mesh 1 and 2 did not include support for Istioctl, the command line utility for the Istio project that includes many diagnostic and debugging utiltiies. OpenShift Service Mesh 3 introduces support for Istioctl for select commands. Installation and management of Istio will only be supported by the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenShift Service Mesh 1 and 2 did not include support for Istioctl, the command line utility for the Istio project that includes many diagnostic and debugging utilties. OpenShift Service Mesh 3 introduces support for Istioctl for select commands. Installation and management of Istio will only be supported by the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator.
```
